Northwest

Hydro and biofuel, with some wind and natural gas

Resources generally exceed peak demand

West

Natural gas and wind, with some solar

Resources generally exceed peak demand

Southwest

Wind and natural gas, with some solar

Resources generally equal peak demand

Toronto

Nuclear, with some natural gas

Resources are less than peak demand

Essa

Hydro, with some natural gas

Resources are much less than peak demand

Ottawa

Cogeneration

Resources are much less than peak demand

The East and Southwest zones are not generally congested. The transmission systems in these zones
operate well below capacity, allowing for the transfer of power to the Toronto and Ottawa zones in
addition to supplying local demand.
The Toronto, Ottawa, and Essa zones are load congested. These zones rely on transfers from other
zones to meet zonal peak demand, and the transmission network within the zones operates at or near
capacity during peak load periods.
The Bruce, Niagara, and Northwest zones are generation congested. Installed generation capacity in
the zones is equal to or greater than the combination of demand within the zones and the ability to
transfer electricity out of the zone. This results in the zonal transmission systems operating at or near
capacity whenever zonal generation peaks.
The Northeast and West zones have some transfer capability available. In the Northeast zone,
congestion is more likely than in the West given that it is tied to lower-cost baseload and peaking
hydro generators. In the west zone, capability is limited when natural gas-fired generators are online.

4.3.2.3 Distribution
While some large industrial consumers are directly connected to the transmission grid and purchase
electricity from the Ontario electricity market, most industrial customers and smaller consumers,
including residential consumers, are served by local distribution companies (LDCs). LDCs own and
operate infrastructure to convert high-voltage electricity to a lower voltage, and deliver electricity to
end-users.
There are currently 78124 licensed electricity distributors operating in Ontario. In addition to
delivering electricity to end-users, LDCs perform billing functions reflecting distribution charges and
other charges, as described in Section 4.3.1.4.

123 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). 2016c. IESO Report: Energy Storage. March. Accessed October 2017.
http://www.ieso.ca/-/media/files/ieso/document-library/energy-storage/ieso-energy-storage-report_march-2016.pdf
124 “Licensed companies and licensing information.” 05 Oct. 2017.OEB.ca. Ontario Energy Board, n.d. Web.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

134

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.2.4 Electricity Exports
Ontario is part of North America’s large,
interconnected electricity system, allowing for
added ability to manage generation surpluses
and shortfalls. Ontario currently has
interconnections with Quebec and Manitoba in
Canada, and Minnesota, Michigan, and New
York in the United States (U.S.); and can import
and export electricity on a continual basis to
balance the province’s electricity system.

FIGURE 4-30 ONTARIO NET EXPORTS, 2007-2016125

Ontario’s interconnection with neighbouring
jurisdictions allows for the efficient import and
export of electricity based on the province’s
supply and demand levels, as well as that of its
neighbours. This allows for operational and
planning flexibility, and enhances the reliability and cost-effectiveness of the electricity system.
Ontario is a net exporter of electricity, given surplus generation in the province. Net exports have
trended up from 2007 through to 2015, from 5.1TWh to 16.8TWh, but declined to 13.9TWh in 2016, a
trend that is expected to continue based on forecasts for the demand and supply of electricity as
outlined in the ensuing sections.
Electricity exports are priced on the wholesale market, at the HOEP. As discussed in Section 4.3.1.4,
the cost of generating and transmitting electricity is reflected in other charges paid by Ontario
consumers. Therefore, while generating some revenue, exports do not allow for recovery of the full
cost of supplying the electricity exported.

4.3.3

Electricity Forecasts

With the combination of economic and population growth, and improved energy efficiency across
homes and business, all taken within the context of climate change and environmental considerations,
demand and supply profiles have changed over time. This has given rise to the need for a long-term
planning approach to meeting the Province’s energy needs.
The LTEP is produced by the Ministry and is the tool by which the province plans for long-term energy
needs and sets out long term energy policies. The planning process that LTEP follows balances costeffectiveness, reliability, clean energy, community engagement, and places emphasis on conservation
and demand management before building new generation.
Ontario’s first LTEP was released in 2010 and was updated in 2013 and again in 2017. The 2017 LTEP,
released in Fall 2017, covers the 2017-2035 planning horizon.

125 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). 2016a. Ontario Planning Outlook. September 1. Accessed October 2017.
http://www.ieso.ca/sector-participants/planning-and-forecasting/ontario-planning-outlook.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

135

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.3.1 Ontario’s Long-term Energy Plan
The Province’s plans, as outlined in the 2013 LTEP, include:


Encouraging conservation, which will drive planning, approval and procurement processes;



Retracting on previous plans to construct two new nuclear reactors, while moving forward with
plans to decommission the Pickering Generating Station;



Increasing the installed capacity of renewable energy;



Using natural gas-fired generation to allow for flexible response to changes in demand and
supply;



Considering opportunities for clean energy imports from other jurisdictions; and



Exploring opportunities for the use of energy storage technologies.

The 2017 LTEP builds on the plans as previously outlined, with key initiatives including:


Ensuring affordable energy, with projections for the cost of electricity for large industrial
customers to, on average, increase in line with inflation over the forecast period.



Spreading the cost of existing electricity infrastructure over a longer period by refinancing a
portion of the Global Adjustment.



Supporting expanded access to natural gas.



Ensuring a flexible energy system, with a Market Renewal initiative being launched.



Maximizing use of Ontario’s existing electricity infrastructure to limit future increases in the cost of
electricity.



Removing barriers to the deployment of cost-effective energy storage.



Continued commitment to energy conservation.

Based on the LTEP, the expectation is that, by 2025, there will be a significant reduction in surplus
baseload generation (SBG), with demand response strategies addressing peak demand needs.

4.3.3.2 Ontario Planning Outlook
The Ontario Planning Outlook (OPO) was prepared by the IESO in response to the Minister’s request
for a technical report on the adequacy and reliability of Ontario’s electricity resources to support
development of the 2017 LTEP. The report reflects the IESO’s planning outlook for 2016 through to
2035 (IESO, 2017).
The OPO provides an overview of Ontario’s current electricity system, including:


A demand outlook



Potential for resources to meet that demand



Risks associated with various resources



Costs of the electricity system



An emissions outlook for the electricity system

While Ontario currently generates excess electricity, an excess is never planned. Based on the
projection included in the OPO, the expectation is that, by 2025, there will be a significant reduction
in surplus baseload generation (SBG), as discussed further in Section 4.3.3.6, with demand response
strategies addressing peak demand needs.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

136

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.3.3 Electricity Demand Forecast
The OPO considers a range of electricity demand levels in Ontario in 2035, from 133 TWh to
197 TWh, under four scenarios:


Outlook A explores lower electricity demand



Outlook B explores a level of demand that roughly matches current demand levels



Outlooks C and D explore higher demand driven by policy choices stemming from Ontario’s
Climate Change Action Plan, including assumptions around the adoption of electric vehicles and
planned electrified transit projects

The scenarios include varying assumptions regarding the level of conservation, more stringent
building codes, and higher equipment standards.
Through the LTEP, the Province is planning for a flat demand scenario as reflected in Outlook B, while
allowing for flexibility to adjust to changes in demand. Additionally, conservation and demand
response programs are expected to have a significant impact on reducing total and peak demand.
Demand Expectations
Under a flat demand outlook
(Outlook B), total electricity demand is
expected to marginally increase, at a
compounded annual growth rate of
0.16 percent, from 143.4 TWh in 2016
to 147.8 TWh in 2035 (Figure 4-31).
The stable demand outlook largely
assumes that population and economic
growth that would otherwise increase
demand are counterbalanced by
conservation measures.

FIGURE 4-31 ONTARIO NET ENERGY DEMAND ACROSS
DEMAND OUTLOOKS126

The outlook assumes an uptick in
electricity requirements for electric vehicles and planned electrified transit projects, including RER and
light rail projects as approved at the date of the report. Taken together, these initiatives are projected
to account for a total of 4 TWh in 2035, of which approximately 0.55 TWh is attributed to transit
projects. Peak demand is expected to be relatively unchanged from 2016 to 2025, ranging from 23.9
to 24.1 MW, and then increasing to 24.8 MW by 2035. Transportation is expected to account for
2 percent of peak demand in 2035 (IESO, 2016).
Under a higher demand outlook (Outlook D), in 2035 the total electricity demanded is projected to be
197 TWh. This assumes an increase in residential and commercial electricity demand due to increased
electrical space and water heating, accounting for a total increase in electricity demand of 30 TWh.
Outlook D also assumes a shift to electricity based energy generation in the industrial sector, an
increased number of electric vehicles (2.4 million by 2035), and electrification of transit, accounting
for approximately 9 TWh and 0.65 TWh, respectively. Peak demand is expected to grow to 35.4 MW
by 2035 (IESO, 2016).

126 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). 2016a. Ontario Planning Outlook. September 1. Accessed October 2017.
http://www.ieso.ca/sector-participants/planning-and-forecasting/ontario-planning-outlook.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

137

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The difference between summer and winter
peak varies across demand outlooks and across
the forecast period. There is currently a
difference of approximately 1,800 MW between
summer and winter peak demand (Figure 4-32).
Over the forecast period, under a stable
demand outlook, the variance is expected to
increase to 2,369 MW in 2036. Under higher
demand outlooks, Ontario is expected to
become a winter peaking province; if this
occurs, the variance between summer and
winter peak demand is significantly reduced by
2025, and winter peak demand is projected to
exceed summer peak demand by as much as
6,900 MW in Outlook D128.

FIGURE 4-32 NET SUMMER PEAK MINUS NET
WINTER PEAK127

Conservation and Demand Response Programs
A significant percentage of the forecasted growth in electricity demand is expected to be offset by
conservation programs and improved codes and standards. The LTEP includes a long-term
conservation target of 30 TWh in 2032.
Demand response programs provide a variety of incentives to encourage end-users to reduce
electricity use during peak hours. Demand response initiatives led to a reduction in peak demand of
approximately 1.8 gigawatt (GW) in 2015 and are expected to reduce peak demand by 10 percent, or
approximately 2.5 GW by 2025.

4.3.3.4 Electricity Supply Forecast
Supply assumptions are based on existing
resources that have been procured but are not
yet in service, and resources that have neither
been procured nor acquired as of the date of
the OPO, but have been directed to meet
provincial policy objectives.

FIGURE 4-33 INSTALLED CAPACITY AND CAPACITY
CONTRIBUTIONS129

Assuming that all current resources continue
until contract expiration and all nuclear
refurbishments, as well as committed and
directed resources, come into service as
scheduled, total installed capacity is expected
to slowly increase from 39.6 GW in 2016 to
42.6 GW in 2035, 7 percent growth over the
Source: (IESO, 2016)
period. While the installed capacity increases,
there will be an increasing reliance on renewable energy sources, which are, in the case of solar and
wind, more variable. Accordingly, while installed capacity generally increases, except for a decline in
the late 2020s, the capacity contribution of resources is generally unchanged over the forecast period.
127 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). 2016a. Ontario Planning Outlook. September 1. Accessed October 2017.
http://www.ieso.ca/sector-participants/planning-and-forecasting/ontario-planning-outlook.
128 ibid.
129 ibid.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

138

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Expectations for each source of electricity, based on current resources as well as committed and
directed resources, are described in the following paragraphs.

Nuclear
While previous forecasts indicated the need for additional nuclear generating capacity, based on the
current outlook, and given revised demand forecasts, additional capacity is not necessary.
Accordingly, the Province is not planning to move ahead with plans to build additional nuclear plants
and will proceed with plans to decommission the Pickering plant, which currently has six units in
operation and an installed capacity of 3,100 MW. Two units will be retired at the end of 2022 and four
units at the end of 2024.
Nuclear energy is expected to account for 48 percent of Ontario’s electricity production in 2035
The Province retains the option to build additional nuclear capacity if future needs dictate. It is the
Ministry’s intention to maintain the licence granted by the Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission for
the construction of new nuclear units.

Hydro
Ontario has significant additional hydro potential; however, most of the potential exists in relatively
remote northern communities, and would, therefore, be developed at a relatively high cost. Hydro
power is expected to account for 27 percent of total electricity production in 2035.

Natural Gas
The natural gas fleet allows for flexibility to respond to variability in renewable energy sources. This
relatively low-carbon source is, therefore, an important part of Ontario’s supply mix. Natural gas
production is expected to account for 9 percent of total electricity production in 2035.

Wind, Solar and Bioenergy
Wind, solar and bioenergy are expected to make more significant contributions to Ontario’s energy
mix in 2025 and beyond. Collectively, these non-water renewables are expected to account for
16 percent of electricity production in 2035, largely due to the expansion of wind electricity
production.

4.3.3.5 Forecasted Demand Relative to Supply
The IESO’s assessment is that there are sufficient resources to meet flat demand levels (Outlooks B),
with relatively low surplus generation during peak demand periods. The higher demand scenarios
would, however, present challenges of scale and integration, requiring the deployment of multiple
low-carbon options and significant investments in transmission and distribution systems. The OPO,
however, underscores the need for more conservation, rather than investment in additional
generating capacity, to meet the higher demand under those scenarios. The Province will be able to
adapt to a lower demand scenario by choosing not to renew existing contracts for generation upon
expiration, if the energy is not needed.
The capacity contribution (that is, maximum output) of installed capacity relative to peak demand
(including a planning reserve) under Outlook B is outlined below (Figure 4-34).

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

139

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-34 CAPACITY CONTRIBUTION VS. DEMAND
Winter Capacity Contribution vs Demand

Summer Capacity Contribution vs Demand
45,000

45,000

40,000

40,000

35,000

35,000

30,000

30,000

25,000

25,000

20,000

20,000

Outlook A

Outlook D

Outlook A

Summer Capacity Contribution

Outlook D

Winter Capacity Contribution

Source: (IESO, 2016)130

The forecast suggests that under a stable demand scenario, Ontario will generate sufficient electricity
to meet peak demand. In a higher demand outlook such as Outlook D, the province is expected to
have sufficient resources to meet demand through to 2022 however additional resources would be
required to meet demand beyond 2022. It is however noted that demand and supply forecasts are
based on a variety of assumptions, including median weather conditions and consumer preferences
such as actual adoption of electric vehicles and use of electricity for home heating, to name a few.
Extreme weather events or significant changes in consumer preferences can therefore have a
significant impact on forecasts.

4.3.3.6 Surplus Baseload Generation
SBG refers to baseload generation in excess of provincial demand plus net exports. SBG is managed
through exports, by diverting water from hydro turbines, by curtailing wind and solar generation, and
by managing units at the Bruce Nuclear Generating Station.
In FYE 2016, as shown on Figure 4-35, SBG
amounted to approximately 9 percent of
Ontario net demand. The OPO indicates that
SBG is expected to decline through to 2035,
largely due to the decommissioning of the
Pickering Nuclear Generating Station and, from
2020-2028, as units at the Darlington and Bruce
Nuclear Generating Stations are being brought
out-of-service for refurbishment in the 2020s.
Periods of SBG will be further impacted by:

FIGURE 4-35 SURPLUS BASELOAD GENERATION AS
A PERCENTAGE OF NET DEMAND



Variability in seasonal demand and supply
patterns, with period of SBG being more
prevalent in the spring and fall months



Shifting demand patterns brought on by demand response programs that seek to reduce peak
energy usage, thereby shifting demand to traditionally off-peak periods

130 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). 2016a. Ontario Planning Outlook. September 1. Accessed October 2017.
http://www.ieso.ca/sector-participants/planning-and-forecasting/ontario-planning-outlook.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

140

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT



Increased uptake of electric vehicles, leading to increased demand for electricity overnight



Increased use of electricity for heating homes



Energy storage programs that will seek to store energy during periods of SBG, thereby limiting the
availability of surplus electricity

4.3.3.7 Forecasted Grid Capacity
Capacity of the transmission network has implications for the location, size, and number of hydrogen
generation facilities proposed to support Hydrail. Consideration would need to be given to
forecasted capacity and congestion levels within each zone of the electricity system, which will have to
be weighed against the cost associated with larger hydrogen generation and storage facilities, ability
of the supplier to exercise flexibility in the timing of hydrogen production, and the cost of hydrogen
transportation.
While congestion in the system is currently manageable, future changes in demand and supply can be
expected to increase congestion challenges as more variable and distributed energy resources come
into service. Additionally, the retirement of the Pickering Nuclear Generating Station may increase
flows from southwestern Ontario, resulting in higher congestion in the Southwest and Toronto zones.
As Figure 4-36 shows, generation capacity in the
Toronto and Bruce zones are expected to
decline by 2020, due to a reduction in nuclear
generation. Assuming flat demand, it can be
expected that load congestion in the Toronto
zone will be magnified, while generation
congestion in the Bruce zone is expected to be
somewhat alleviated, but not eliminated.

FIGURE 4-36 ZONE GENERATION CAPACITY

Generation capacity in the East, West, and
Southwest zones is expected to increase.
However, as noted in Section 4.3.2.2, these
zones are currently uncongested, with some
transfer capability.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

141

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.4

Electricity Pricing

Electricity prices in Ontario primarily comprise
the HOEP and the GA. Transmission,
distribution, regulatory, and other charges
combined may also account for roughly
20-30 percent of prices, and vary depending on
location within the transmission grid.

FIGURE 4-37 HOEP VS. GA

The HOEP is the wholesale price of electricity
and is determined in a real-time market,
operated by the IESO. The HOEP changes
hourly, based on demand and supply of
electricity. It is significantly impacted by time of
day, day of week, weather factors, and economic
conditions.
Every day, the IESO forecasts electricity demand for the days and weeks ahead. Generators and
electricity importers submit offers to supply electricity and indicate the prices they are willing to
accept. Large customers and exporters submit bids for electricity purchases at specified prices. The
IESO accepts the lowest cost offers to supply electricity to meet demand. A new market clearing price
is set every 5 minutes. The HOEP is the average of the 12 market clearing prices set in each hour. The
impact of demand and supply forces on the electricity market results in a higher HOEP during peak
demand periods and a lower HOEP during periods of excess supply (SBG).
The GA is paid by all Ontario electricity customers, and reflects the net cost of electricity generation
and the cost of delivering conservation programs. The GA varies monthly, adjusting for the difference
between the HOEP and the cost of regulated and contracted generation.
The main components of the GA are:


GA-OEFC-NUG (M$) – Contracts administered by the Ontario Electricity Financial Corporation with
existing generation facilities



GA-OPG (M$) – Ontario Power Generation nuclear and baseload hydro generating stations



GA-OPA (M$) – Contracts with the IESO (and with the former Ontario Power Authority) for new
gas-fired generation, renewable facilities, energy from waste and biomass, nuclear
refurbishments, as well as conservation programs.

4.3.4.1 Electricity Pricing for Large Businesses
Industrial customers with an average peak demand of over 1 MW and targeted manufacturing and
industrial customers with peak demand of over 500 KW and under 1MW (collectively, Class A
customers) are eligible for participation in the Industrial Conservation Initiative (ICI), which was
introduced in 2010.
Through the ICI the GA attributed to participating customers is calculated based on the customer’s
percentage contribution to the top five peak Ontario demand hours, over a 12-month base period.
The ICI, therefore, allows participating customers to manage their GA costs by reducing demand
during peak periods, and allows the province to defer building new electricity infrastructure to meet
peak demand. It is estimated that in 2016, the ICI helped to reduce peak electricity demand by
approximately 1.3 GW.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

142

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The peak demand factor (PDF) is calculated by taking the sum of the customer’s demand during the
top five peak Ontario demand hours in the base period (May 1 to April 30), and dividing it by the total
system consumption during those hours. The calculated ratio is the customer’s peak demand factor.
The customer’s monthly GA cost is calculated by multiplying the PDF by the provincial GA cost in each
of the ensuing 12 months (July 1 to June 30).
A participating customer can manage their GA costs by reducing electricity use during forecasted
peak hours. The IESO provides tools to track current and projected demand, along with a forecast of
system conditions. Peak periods generally coincide with:


Heat waves in the summer or cold snaps in the winter



Weekday afternoons in the summer



Early weekday evenings during the winter

A customer who can significantly reduce electricity usage during peak hours will have relatively
minimal GA costs. It is however noted, as discussed in sections 4.3.3.5 and 4.3.3.6, that a variety of
factors can impact demand patterns and that demand patterns are expected to the change in the
future. An important consideration for Hydrail is that peak demand hours may be more difficult to
predict than they are presently.

4.3.4.2 Policy Initiatives Impact on Electricity Prices in Ontario
Electricity prices are driven by decisions of the past and those decisions impact prices long into the
future. Policy initiatives or pricing regimes may either shift the cost of investments from one user
group to another or defer costs to future generations, based on economic or social factors at play at
the time of consideration. As history has shown in Ontario, electricity policy and investment priorities
change over time and likely will continue to evolve as market conditions and government policy
priorities evolve.
The ICI is a policy initiative of the Government of Ontario that was designed to reduce peak demand
and to support Ontario’s industrial sector. While the ICI has effectively achieved its objective to date,
the policy could be challenged on merit, as it may be argued that the ability to shift consumption of
electricity away from peak hours should not absolve a company of its obligation to share in the costs
that the GA is designed to recover.
Notwithstanding, it is noted that electricity pricing in Ontario is generally expected to move to more of
a market-driven model. Under such a model, consumption during hours of high demand should
ultimately result in higher electricity costs, with the reverse also applying. Accordingly, while the ICI
may be terminated or decline in significance in the future, the principle upon which it is based will
likely still apply.
Other recent policy initiatives of the Province have led to an average 25 percent reduction in
electricity prices for residential and small business customers in 2017 under the Fair Hydro Act, 2017.
Initiatives under the Fair Hydro Act 2017 include refinancing of a portion of the GA to spread the cost
of electricity investments over a longer time period, thereby reflecting the longer lifecycle of existing
facilities, and sharing the costs with future generations.
As outlined in the 2017 LTEP, the government is also considering measures to provide electricity rate
assistance to non-Class A mid-sized customers (Class B customers). One such consideration is a
change to the way the GA is charged to these customers, who currently pay the same GA charges
regardless of time of use. It is not yet known whether these measures will impact the way GA costs are
charged to other customers.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

143

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.4.3 Market Renewal
Market Renewal is a set of initiatives intended to redesign Ontario’s electricity market, leading to
reduced supply costs and increased flexibility. These initiatives will:


Improve the way Ontario acquires supply to meet medium- and long-term needs;



Enable the IESO to more cost-effectively schedule and dispatch electricity to meet demand as it
changes from hour-to-hour and minute-to-minute; and



Increase flexibility, enabling the IESO to more efficiently manage unexpected short-term changes
to the system, like those that can be caused by variable generation such as wind and solar.

Market renewal is expected to result in cost savings, given more efficient use of existing assets, which
is consistent with the province’s long-term plans. It will also lead to greater market competition and a
more flexible procurement process that is better aligned with system needs.

4.3.4.4 Pricing Outlook
Under Outlook B, the IESO expects that the average unit cost of operating the electricity system will
gradually increase to $152/MWh by 2025, relative to $144/MWh in 2016. Thereafter, the cost is
expected to generally decline to $131/MWh by 2035. The decline is based on the renewal of existing
generating contracts at lower rates, as existing generators continue to operate at costs below existing
contract rates, and given reduced investment in electricity resources.
Under Outlook D, the cost of electricity in
2025 is expected to range from $155/MWh to
$160/MWh, given the need to invest in
additional resources to meet higher demand,
while keeping emissions low. The average
unit cost is expected to generally decline,
ranging from $137/MWh to $142/MWh by
2035, as existing contracts are renewed at
lower rates and higher volumes reduce the
average cost of operation.

FIGURE 4-38 CLASS A ELECTRICITY PRICE FORECAST

The projection for the price of electricity for a
typical large industrial customer, as presented
in the 2017 LTEP is outlined in Figure 4-38.
The all-in price of electricity, reflecting the HOEP, transmission, regulatory and other costs, and the
GA, is expected to range from $102/MWh in 2025 to $116/MWh in 2035.

4.3.5

Implications for Hydrail

4.3.5.1 Provincial Policy Objectives
Electrification of transportation, both by means of overhead electrification and using HFC technology,
is consistent with policy objectives as set out in the Premier’s mandate letter to the Minister of Energy.
The use of HFC technology presents the added benefit of supporting the growth of the low-carbon
economy and the reduction of GHG emissions, by potentially allowing for a broader replacement of
diesel trains on the GO network with electric trains than would be possible through overhead
electrification. Further to this, Hydrail could allow for load-shifting, by consuming electricity when
there is SBG, versus adding to peak demand as would be the case with overhead electrification.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

144

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Hydrail, therefore, also could support the Province’s goal of driving efficiencies and limiting
expenditure on new electricity infrastructure.

4.3.5.2 Capturing SBG
The assessment shows that, while the level of SBG is expected to decline, electricity production is
expected to exceed Ontario net demand by 1-4 percent from 2024 to 2035. There are however
seasonal variations in the level of SBG and, particularly given the increasing reliance on renewable
energy in the province’s energy supply mix, weather related factors can further impact electricity
generation, and therefore SBG. SBG is often available over short periods of time and to fully capture it
would require an infrastructure build-out that would allow for the production and storage of hydrogen
over short periods of time, which would be idle outside of these periods.
The ability to harness SBG to produce hydrogen is a function of the scale of hydrogen production
(current density) and storage (volume) infrastructure, relative to when the SBG is available. Using
hydrogen production and storage assumptions from the Hydrail simulation model, along with
demand projections as presented in the 2016 OPO, modelling work shows that only approximately
14-35 percent of the annual amount of hydrogen required to support Hydrail can be produced from
electricity supplied during periods of SBG over the 2025-2035 time frame. Furthermore, the same
analysis shows that only 6-23 percent of operating days over the forecast period could be fully
supplied by SBG.
A further consideration is the province’s plans to incorporate energy storage technologies in
managing the electricity system. The use of such technologies will lead to a further reduction in excess
supply, as surpluses would be at least partially captured and stored by the province, thereby reducing
the amount supplied to the market. The use of energy storage technologies would limit the ability of
market participants to capture surplus baseload generation.
Therefore, it is unlikely that the Hydrail System will be able to operate solely on electricity produced
during periods of SBG. Accordingly, while the system would be able to avoid Ontario peak demand
hours, therefore producing during off-peak hours, the system as currently designed, will not be able
to consistently minimize the price of electricity, as it will be limited by the density of the hydrogen
production facilities and the capacity of the hydrogen storage facilities.

4.3.5.3 Electricity Pricing
As noted in the preceding sections, the HOEP is market driven, with lower prices during periods
where the supply of electricity exceeds demand. Further to this, based on the current pricing structure
and government policy initiatives, the ability to consume electricity outside of peak provincial demand
hours can allow for the elimination of GA costs. On this basis, assuming the current pricing and policy
regimes remain in effect, Hydrail presents certain benefits in respect of the unit cost of electricity
relative to overhead electrification. These benefits are derived from the flexibility to schedule
hydrogen production outside of Ontario peak demand hours, thereby minimizing or avoiding GA
charges, and at times of lower HOEP thereby realizing lower electricity costs. This benefit must be
weighed against the increased rate of consumption of electricity (for traction) in the case of Hydrail
relative to overhead electrification, which could somewhat negate the unit cost advantage of Hydrail
when considering the total overall cost of electricity.
A further consideration is the potential shift in provincial demand patterns and the impact this will
have on the peak/off-peak variance in the HOEP. The production of hydrogen will result in an increase
in demand for electricity during periods of hydrogen production, which, given the significant load it
will represent, could cause upward pressure on prices during that period. Additionally, as the
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

145

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

province encourages the electrification of transit and demand response programmes, both of which
shift demand away from peak periods, it can be expected that there will be increased demand for
electricity during traditional off-peak periods, which could in-turn increase the HOEP during these
periods. This will likely result in a reduction of the variance in HOEP, and therefore also a reduction in
cost advantage for consumption during traditional off-peak periods. Should this be the case, the unit
cost advantage of Hydrail relative to overhead electrification will be partially eroded.
The government’s ICI program is intended to help flatten out the daily energy consumption profile by
shifting demand to off peak periods. The success of these programs can be viewed as a risk to the
Hydrail business case, especially considering the significant electricity requirements to produce
hydrogen at the required scale for the rail network.

4.3.5.4 Location of Hydrogen Generation Facilities
As noted in Section 4.3.2.2, there are load and generation constraints in some zones across the
Ontario electricity system. At present, decentralized hydrogen production to support Hydrail is being
considered. Relative to centralized production, decentralized production would allow for smaller
loads being drawn across different zones of the grid, from production facilities located along each line
of the GO network. There are pros and cons to decentralized production, depending on the capacity
constraints within the zones being contemplated and the location of potential hydrogen generation
facilities relative to the GO network. Such matters would be resolved through detailed planning and
procurement activities.
The GO network extends across the East, Essa, Toronto and Southwest zones. In the East and
Southwest zones, generation either exceeds or meets peak demand, with generation capacity
expected to increase by 2020. Both zones are generally uncongested, and should therefore allow for
additional loads. The Lakeshore East line extends into the East zone, while the Lakeshore West and
Kitchener lines extends into the Southwest zone.
In the Toronto and Essa zones, resources are less than peak demand, and both zones are load
congested. The situation within the Toronto zone is expected to be magnified by the anticipated
decommissioning of the Pickering nuclear generating plant by 2024.
All GO lines run through the Toronto zone, however there may be locational challenges within the
zone (space, property zoning, environmental, price), which may be compounded by limited public
acceptance, particularly given the urban setting, as discussed in Section 4.8. The Barrie, Stouffville and
Richmond Hill lines all run through the Essa zone.
A decentralized approach to hydrogen production (described in Section 4.1) would involve the
establishment of generation facilities along each line of GO network, crossing each of the four zones
discussed. The significant advantage of decentralized generation is the cost advantage of smaller
facilities along each line of the GO network. Based on the foregoing, there may however, be other
challenges associated with this approach. One significant challenge is the limited capacity within
Toronto, a situation that is expected to persist for the foreseeable future.
A similar challenge would also be faced in the Essa zone. Further to this, consideration should also be
given to the competing demands of electric vehicles, the continued adoption of which the 2017 LTEP
acknowledges could have a significant impact on the province’s distribution network. Should
hydrogen generation facilities be established within these zones, careful planning would be required
to ensure hydrogen generation does not inadvertently stress local grids.
Centralized hydrogen production facilities could be placed within the East zone, along the Lakeshore
East line. In a semi-centralized scenario, hydrogen generation facilities could be located in the East
and Southwest zones, along the Lakeshore East, Lakeshore West and Kitchener Lines.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

146

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.6

Electricity Pricing Forecast for Hydrail

Electricity prices for RER under Hydrail have been projected based on forecasted electricity prices in
Ontario and the Hydrail production simulation model. The electricity price assumptions are outlined in
Table 4-27.
TABLE 4-27 ELECTRICITY PRICE ASSUMPTIONS
Price Component
Hourly Ontario
Electricity Price
(HOEP)

Assumptions
The forward looking HOEP was estimated by IESO using the following logic:


Historical HOEP pattern for each year was developed by dividing each hourly HOEP by the
annual average to get the yearly mean-normal pattern.



The most representative historical HOEP pattern was selected for each of the projected years
(2017-2035)



Historical HOEP patterns were scaled to the appropriate annual average marginal cost using
numbers in-line with the 2017 LTEP.

Global Adjustment

The forward-looking GA charges are based on the forecast presented in the 2013 LTEP for a
typical industrial customer. It is noted that, with the introduction of Hydrail, projected GA charges
may be impacted, as discussed in Section 4.3.4. An assessment of the impact of same is,
however, not within the scope of this study, and accordingly no adjustments have been made to
the forecasts presented in the LTEP.

Regulatory and
Transmission charges

The forward looking regulatory and transmission charges are based on the forecast presented in
the 2013 LTEP.

The Hydrail Operational Simulation Model (described in Section 4.4.1) includes an algorithm that uses
the HOEP price and the amount of hydrogen required for the Hydrail System to create a hydrogen
production schedule that minimizes the cost of electricity, subject to the capacity of the hydrogen
production and storage facilities.
Given the optimized production schedule as described above, no electricity would be consumed
during Ontario peak hours and therefore, under the ICI, the system would not be subject to GA. The
ICI is however, a policy initiative and therefore subject to changes as discussed in section 4.3.4.1. On
this basis, two pricing scenarios were developed based on whether the system is subject to GA
charges.
In the low case, the electricity price is estimated based on the assumption that the system operator
pays no GA charge. In the high case, it is assumed that the ICI is discontinued and therefore, the
operator pays full GA charges.
The electricity pricing scenarios for Hydrail are presented in Table 4-28.
TABLE 4-28 ELECTRICITY PRICE FORECAST FOR HYDRAIL BASED ON ONTARIO’S 2017 LTEP
2024

2025

2026

2027

2028

2029

2030

2031

2032

2033

2034

2035

Low Case ($/MWh)

34.2

35.6

41.2

39.3

40.3

41.5

42.6

43.8

44.4

45.2

46.4

48.4

High Case ($/MWh)

68.7

61.7

77.1

73.9

74.6

73.8

72.7

72.9

74.2

75.2

76.1

77.9

The 10-year average electricity price for Hydrail is estimated at $46 /MWh and $76 /MWh without and
with GA, respectively.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

147

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.7

Summary of Key Findings

The foregoing assessment of the Ontario electricity system, pricing and policies indicates that in
considering electrification of the GO network with Hydrail, electricity pricing assumptions must
consider:


The possibility of being unable to consistently capture SBG due to an increase in demand for
electricity, combined with relatively stable supply, increased use of energy storage technologies
and reducing the occurrence of SBG. Due to these factors as well as the limitations of the
production and storage facilities, conservative assumptions should be made about capturing SBG
and the electricity prices associated with off-peak energy usage.



A change in electricity pricing policy negatively impacting on electricity pricing. As noted in
Section 4.3.4, the current pricing regime may change such that the ability to avoid GA charges
does not persist in the future. This will have a significant impact on the overall cost of electricity
and will reduce the unit price advantage that would be afforded to Hydrail under the current
regime.



A shift in demand profiles leading to a smaller differential in peak and off-peak pricing peak. The
load presented by Hydrail is significant; therefore, it will impact provincial electricity, given the
shift in the demand profile during off-peak periods. This will reduce the differential between peak
and off-peak hours, thereby reducing the unit price advantage of Hydrail relative to overhead
electrification.



The impact of the added load required by Hydrail on overall electricity prices (given an increase in
demand). In addition to impacting electricity pricing during off-periods, the load introduced by
Hydrail will increase overall demand for electricity, also driving an overall increase in the price of
electricity, given the expectation for supply to remain relatively constant. A further consideration is
the impact on the GA, as an increased load consuming what would otherwise be surplus
electricity, should result in a general reduction in the GA charges applied across all customers.

Further to this, in determining whether to take a centralized or decentralized approach to hydrogen
generation, careful consideration should be given to load constraints within different zones of the
electricity system, and the implication for the ability to operate electrolyzers without any destabilizing
effects on the electricity grid.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

148

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.4

Costs and Benefits

One of the primary goals of the feasibility study is to analyze the anticipated financial impact of Hydrail
on the RER program. To perform this analysis in a way that will allow for a comparison of Hydrail and
the currently contemplated electrification scenarios, models that are in use by Metrolinx were used as
the starting point for the analysis presented in this section.
The financial impact was analyzed by following six steps:
1. The GO RER network was modelled by CNL (the “Hydrail Operational Simulation Model”) to
determine the requirements of a Hydrail System (quantity of hydrogen needed, infrastructure
requirements, fuelling).
2. The IBC model from 2014 was analyzed to gain an understanding of how the BCR was developed
and to identify the key items that would change under a Hydrail scenario.
3. Relevant cost inputs from the Hydrail simulation model were used to update the IBC model. An
interface sheet was developed to capture capital, capital replacement, operating, and
maintenance costs for Hydrail.
4. Low- and high-cost scenarios were developed for key input variables (for example, cost of
electricity, capital costs of Hydrail components and life cycle of assets). These assumptions were
used to develop a range of costs for the Hydrail System.
5. A sensitivity analysis was then performed to determine which cost inputs have the most significant
impact on total cost. Those costs were then further scrutinized.
6. Based on the results of the sensitivity analysis, Low- and high-cost ranges were finalized to allow
for comparison with overhead electrification.
The financial modelling process is shown in Figure 4-39. Each step in the modelling process will be
reviewed in more details in the sections that follows.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

149

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-39 HYDRAIL MODELLING PROCESS
Modeling Stage
Review of RER
Benefit‐Cost
Ratio (BCR)

Incremental Benefits of RER

÷

• New & existing transit user time
savings
• Peak & off‐peak road user time savings
• Automobile operating cost reduction
• Safety benefits

Operating Costs:
• Crew, fuel costs
• Rolling stock, infrastructure
maintenance
• Electrification OPEX
• Other

BCR
Capital Costs:
• Infrastructure, fleet, car
parking, maintenance facility,
property costs
• Union station costs
• Electrification CAPEX
• Other

3.07

Incremental Costs of RER Hydrail

Hydrail System
Modeling
Unchanged

Comparative IBC
Analysis

Incremental Costs of RER

Unchanged

Hydrail simulation including updates to costs associated with electrification,
including high/low estimations for:
• CAPEX
• OPEX
• Maintenance

Updated to include incremental Costs of RER hydrail

2.65 – 3.01

Identify three cost inputs which explain variability in capital
and operating costs

Sensitivity
Analysis

Unchanged

Hydrial CAPEX, OPEX and Maintenance cost most sensitive to:
• Price of fuel cells ($/kW)
• Lifetime of fuel cells (hours)
• Cost of electricity ($/MWh)

Notes:
CAPEX = capital expense
OPEX = operating expense

4.4.1

Review of RER Benefit to Cost Ratio Development

The model used for purposes of the feasibility study is the IBC for RER. The IBC model was developed
by a team of Metrolinx staff and consultants in April 2014 in response to the commitment made by the
Province of Ontario to implement RER within a 10-year period. The IBC model outlines the business
case to support RER. Outputs include net benefits, system costs and BCRs. Net benefits explain
whether a scheme is actually worthwhile as a whole, and if it is, by how much. For instance, time
savings to existing and new transit users is a benefit of RER. A complete list of benefits is provided in
the ensuing sections. The BCR also shows how much confidence is required in the accuracy of the
cost and revenue estimates. System costs include capital costs and operating costs, which will be
discussed in detail in the following sections.
The IBC model includes virtually every aspect of the GO rail system and models the impact of
converting the system from a diesel-powered commuter railway to an electric regional express system
that will provide faster, more frequent and all-day services across the Greater Toronto and Hamilton
Area (GTHA). The model includes a financial case (i.e., estimation of capital costs, overheads,
revenues, other income), an economic case (i.e., estimation of benefits), and a deliverability and
operations case (i.e., Union Station, maintenance facilities, and operating and maintenance cost

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

150

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

estimates). The IBC model evaluates benefits and costs associated with five different build-out and
operating scenarios131, including:


Scenario 1: Do Minimum - Peak-focussed limited capital with no electrification.



Scenario 2: Two-Way All-Day - Enhanced diesel service on all corridors with no electrification.



Scenario 3: 10-Year Plan - Frequent service on most inner corridors with limited electrification.



Scenario 4: Full Build (Beyond 10-Year Plan) - Frequent service on all inner corridors with full
electrification.



Scenario 5: Optimized (10-Year Plan Optimized) - Frequent service on most inner corridors with
significant electrification will be achieved under this scenario.

The IBC model evaluates each scenario over 60 years, from January 1, 2015 to December 31, 2074.
All monetary values are in 2014 Canadian dollars. Except where otherwise indicated, future values are
presented as net present value (NPV), using a real discount rate of 3.5 percent per year. The model
has provision for escalation of many costs and for some other key assumptions, including train crew
wage rates, diesel fuel, traction electricity, cost of driving, value of time (VOT) and average GO rail
fares. Automobile operating costs are assumed to rise at 0.7 percent per year in real values, while
VOT is assumed to increase at 1.6 percent per year in real values. All benefit and cost figures are
calculated as incremental to the Do Minimum scenario, which forms the base case.
Examples of variables included in the IBC model include project timing, rolling stock and fleet
configurations, train services, network infrastructure and connectivity, track ownership, station and
maintenance facilities, fares, ridership/demand, economic benefits, bus operations, parking, and
others to enable monitoring of economic attractiveness. Figure 4-40 illustrates the modular
construction of the model.

131 GO RER Initial Business Case
http://www.metrolinx.com/en/regionalplanning/projectevaluation/benefitscases/GO_RER_Initial_Business_Case_EN.pdf
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

151

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-40 MODULAR CONSTRUCTION OF THE IBC MODEL

To the extent possible, the IBC model reflects the structure of costs and understanding of passenger
behaviour. Unit rates and total rates of growth, including costs, revenues and productivity factors,
have been calibrated against actual experience, either by GO or by comparable operators.
Infrastructure capital costs are based on recent GO project costs. The IBC model can be used to test
different service options, assumptions and policies.
Table 4-29 includes key economic, cost, and policy assumptions included in the IBC model.
TABLE 4-29 KEY ASSUMPTIONS INCLUDED IN THE IBC MODEL
Item

Assumption

Project Life

60 years

Discount Rate

3.5% percent

Implementation

All new services commence 2024

Underlying Demand Growth

2.3% per year on average (varies by route) to 2044; in all
scenarios, peak capacity is added to maintain current
average train loads

Fares

No changes to 2015 fare structures; no real increases in
fares (i.e., no fare increases ever)

Other Charges

Other charges are assumed, represented by a potential
parking charge implemented before the end of the RER
program

Costs

No real increase in train crew labour, diesel fuel or
electricity costs

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

152

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-29 KEY ASSUMPTIONS INCLUDED IN THE IBC MODEL
Item

Assumption

Auto Operating Costs

$0.63 per kilometre, increasing at 0.7% per year to 2044

Environmental Assessment, Engineering and Design

15% percent of base capital costs

Infrastructure (Corridors)

Contingency – 50% of base capital costs
Productivity and resource factor – 25% of base capital costs

Infrastructure (System-wide components)

Contingency – 50% of base capital costs

Costs in the IBC Model
The IBC model includes capital and operating costs as categorized in Table 4-30.
TABLE 4-30 CATEGORIZATION OF COSTS IN THE IBC
Capital Costs
Infrastructure (stations, tracks, retaining walls)
Electrification capital costs
Property
Car parking
Fleet
Union Station capital costs
CN and CP Accommodation
CBTC signalling system
PTC
Electrification of Willowbrook
EMU Maintenance Facility
Other
Operating Costs
Crew
Fuel
Electricity for Traction
Rolling Stock Maintenance
Infrastructure Maintenance
User Charges - Plant and Roadway
Other
Notes:
CN = Canadian National Railway
CP = Canadian Pacific Railway
PTC = positive train control

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

153

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

IBC Model: Capital Costs
Capital cost estimates were completed in 2014 based, wherever possible, on GO’s most recent
project experience. This is the case mostly with track, stations, civil infrastructure (such as bridges),
retaining walls, noise walls, road-rail and rail-rail grade separations, conventional signalling, diesel
locomotives, unpowered bi-level cars and property acquisition. Electrification, electric rolling stock,
and advanced train control prices were based on a range of industry sources, both published and
confidential. Infrastructure costs include engineering costs and contingencies.
As part of RER, many existing stations will require new platforms and, therefore, additional access
tunnels and shelters may be required. In some cases, stations will undergo significant change due to
additional track or realignment for bus interchanges. Passenger pick-up will also require modification
to support increased ridership. Additional property may be required at many station locations. The
model also accounted for increased parking requirements at expanded stations.
For RER, additional tracks are required at various locations on each corridor. Typically, hourly two-way
service requires a passing track, while a full second track is required where trains operate every
15 minutes. A third or fourth track is required where there are express services or where tracks are
shared between two or more services, which may include inter-city rail services and freight services.
In all scenarios, costs to install Positive Train Control (PTC132) signalling systems on new track were
included. PTC is a set of highly advanced safety technologies designed automatically stop a train
before certain types of accidents occur. It was also noted that, although not yet a legal requirement in
Canada, systems similar to PTC are installed on many RER systems, and were required on passenger
rail routes in the U.S. at the time of publishing the report.
Union Station is the heart of the GO network, and will continue to be the main destination for peak
commuters from across the GTHA. It is anticipated it will also become a significant interchange point
within the GO rail network and attract greater inbound flows of boarding passengers than is the case
today. Also, there is the potential to attract more trips connecting places on either side of Union
Station, which could be a benefit of running more trains through the station as opposed to
terminating many train routes at Union Station, as is common practice today. Improvements to the
tracks on either side of Union Station and to platform infrastructure will enable the number of trains
RER will schedule to pass through and serve Union Station.

IBC Model: Operating Costs
Operating cost rates were calculated in 2014, mostly from existing GO costs, as determined from
analysis of GO general ledger documents. Costs were calculated based on the service levels as
defined, driven by train crew hours, train kilometres, route kilometres, or vehicle kilometres as
appropriate.
Diesel fuel and traction electricity consumption and costs were estimated based on data presented in
the 2010 GO electrification study and actual GO experience. As with diesel prices, no long-term
change was assumed in electricity prices.
Other operating costs in the IBC include payments to the CN and the CP for track use and dispatching
costs that are calculated from existing charges, adjusted for train-kilometres; rolling stock
maintenance costs that are based on Canadian and U.K. experience, including GO’s existing contract

132 Positive Train Control is a system of functional requirements for monitoring and controlling train movements and is a type of train
protection system.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

154

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

for the operation of diesel trains; and infrastructure maintenance that includes costs related to track
maintenance, signalling infrastructure, and other fixed infrastructure costs.

IBC Model: Benefits
Most of the benefits were estimated based on the ridership that was forecast on RER. Note that
increments were for future years, with and without RER. In other words, the comparison was between
what the system would look like under Scenario 1 – Do Minimum and the contemplated system
expansion scenarios. Benefits quantified in the IBC model are transport-related benefits that are
categorized as follows:


Time savings to existing and new transit users.



Auto cost savings to drivers switching to transit.



Quality benefits such as improved comfort, convenience and reliability for transit users.



Safety benefits, primarily reduced accident costs.



Crowding benefits to transit users.



Road-user benefits, cost and time savings to motorists from reduced congestion.

The IBC also considered wider economic and environmental benefits, but these were not captured by
the modelling exercise so were not included in the calculation of the BCRs.

IBC Model: Benefit to Cost Ratios
The BCRs provided information to decision makers regarding how the overall benefits compare to the
overall costs. A ratio greater than one (for example, 2:1) means that the net benefits outweigh the
costs. A ratio less than one (for example, 1:3) means that the costs outweigh the benefits. In the IBC
model, the ratios were calculated by dividing the incremental benefits of a given scenario by the
incremental costs of a given scenario.
The magnitude of the result also communicated important information about the confidence that
decision makers can have in the result. If the BCR is, for example, 3:1, then decision makers can have a
high level of confidence that a scenario is beneficial. The actual costs would have to be three times
higher, or revenues or other benefits one-third of what is expected, before the scenario would prove
not to be beneficial. If the estimated BCR is close to 1:1, then any cost overrun or ridership shortfall
could bring the result below 1:1, making the scenario as proposed not worthwhile.

IBC Model: Cost Factors
As outlined previously inTable 4-29, the IBC applied several cost factors and contingencies to the
capital costs for overhead electrification. These cost factors include:


A cost factor for Environmental Assessment, Engineering and Design that is 15 percent of base
capital costs.



A construction contingency for the on-corridor infrastructure that is 50 percent of base capital
costs.



A productivity and resource cost factor that is 25 percent of base capital costs for on-corridor
infrastructure.



A construction contingency on system-wide infrastructure components of 50 percent of base
capital costs

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

155

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Result of the IBC
The analysis of BCRs in the IBC resulted in the recommendation that Metrolinx proceed with
Scenario 5. Scenario 5 was subsequently adopted by the Province as the plan for RER. Under
Scenario 5, GO would operate all-day services every 15 minutes to Aldershot, Mount Pleasant, Aurora,
Unionville and Oshawa and introduce electrification to Bramalea, Barrie, Stouffville and Pearson
Airport. Electric trains would replace diesels on some or all of the Lakeshore East and West, Kitchener,
Barrie, and Stouffville lines. Under this scenario, the Milton and Richmond Hill lines would continue to
operate at peak times only, using diesel locomotives.

4.4.2

Hydrail System Modelling

Key Characteristics of Cost Estimation
According to the cost estimating and assessment guide published by the United States Government
Accountability Office (GAO), a cost estimate should have certain basic characteristics as listed in
Table 4-31.
TABLE 4-31 BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF COST ESTIMATES133
Characteristic

Description


Estimator must be provided with the system description, ground rules and
assumptions, and technical and performance characteristics



Estimate's constraints and conditions must be clearly identified to ensure the
preparation of a well-documented estimate



All stakeholders should be involved in deciding mission need and requirements and in
defining system parameters and other characteristics



Data should be independently verified for accuracy, completeness, and reliability



Numerous sources of suitable, relevant, and available data should be used



Relevant, historical data should be used from similar systems to project costs of new
systems; these data should be directly related to the system's performance
characteristics



A standard work breakdown structure (WBS), as detailed as possible, should be used,
refining it as the cost estimate matures and the system becomes more defined



The work breakdown structure ensures that no portions of the estimate are omitted
and makes it easier to make comparisons to similar systems and programs

Provision for program risk
and uncertainty



Uncertainties should be identified and allowance developed to cover the cost effect



Known costs should be included and unknown costs should be allowed for

Recognition of inflation



The estimator should ensure that economic changes, such as inflation, are properly
and realistically reflected in the life-cycle cost estimate



Recognition of excluded costs



All costs associated with a system should be included; any excluded costs should be
disclosed and given a rationale

Independent review of
estimates



Conducting an independent review of an estimate is crucial to establishing confidence
in the estimate; the independent reviewer should verify, modify, and correct an
estimate to ensure realism, completeness, and consistency

Revision of estimates for
significant program changes



Estimates should be updated to reflect changes in a system’s design requirements.
Large changes that affect costs can significantly influence program decisions

Clear identification of task

Broad participation in
preparing estimates
Availability of valid data

Standardized structure for
the estimate

133 US GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide, 2009
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

156

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The Cost Estimating Process
At the feasibility stage of project evaluation, it is important to understand how a cost estimate is
developed to understand the level of certainty associated with that estimate; this process is illustrated
on Figure 4-41.
FIGURE 4-41 THE COST ESTIMATING PROCESS

1. Define
the
estimate’s
purpose

2. Develop
the
estimating
plan

3. Define
the
program

4. Determine
the estimating
structure

5. Identify
ground rules &
assumptions
8. Conduct
sensitivity

6. Obtain
the data

7. Develop the point estimate and
compare it to an independent cost
estimate

9. Conduct a
risk and
uncertainty
analysis

The first step involved in cost estimating is defining the estimate’s purpose. At this stage, the project
team will also define the required level of detail and the overall scope of the costing exercise. Cost
estimates have two general purposes: (1) to assist in the evaluation of affordability of a project or
program and to inform the selection of alternative systems and solutions, and (2) to support the
budget process by providing estimates of the funding required to execute a program134.
In the case of the Hydrail feasibility study, the cost estimate serves both purposes; it is designed
primarily to assist in the evaluation of alternative solutions but will also contribute to an understanding
of the potential budget implications of a Hydrail System over the life of the service. All costs directly
related to electrification with Hydrail were modelled and updated in the IBC model. All other costs,
including station improvements, were excluded from the Hydrail costing exercise.
The second step involved in the estimating process is the development of an estimating plan. For
Hydrail, this involved the use of specialist teams to develop cost estimates for the hydrogen related
components of the system. These estimates were then incorporated into IBC model.
The next five steps (steps three through seven) are the beginning of an iterative process that leads to
a point estimate of the program cost. The details of these steps are described in Table 4-32.

134 US GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide, 2009, pg. 47
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

157

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-32 DESCRIPTION OF STEPS INVOLVED IN DEVELOPING A POINT COST ESTIMATE135
Step

Description






Identify the program's purpose and its system and performance characteristics and all
system configurations;
Any technology implications;
Its relationship to other existing systems;
System quantities for development, test, and production;
Deployment and maintenance plans

4. Determine estimating
structure






Define a work breakdown structure (WBS) and describe each element in a WBS dictionary;
Choose the best estimating method for each WBS element;
Identify potential cross-checks for likely cost and schedule drivers;
Develop a cost estimating checklist.

5. Identify ground rules
and assumptions




Clearly define what the estimate includes and excludes;
Identify global and program-specific assumptions, such as the estimate's base year,
including time-phasing and life cycle;
Identify program schedule information by phase and program acquisition strategy;
Identify any schedule or budget constraints, inflation assumptions, and travel costs;
Specify equipment the government is to furnish as well as the use of existing facilities or
new modification or development;
Identify prime contractor and major subcontractors;
Determine technology refresh cycles, technology assumptions, and new technology to be
developed;
Define commonality with legacy systems and assumed heritage savings;
Describe effects of new ways of doing business.

3. Define program
characteristics










6. Obtain data








7. Develop point
estimate and compare it
to an independent cost
estimate










Create a data collection plan with emphasis on collecting current and relevant technical,
programmatic, cost, and risk data;
Investigate possible data sources;
Collect data and normalize them for cost accounting, inflation, learning, and quantity
adjustments;
Analyze the data for cost drivers, trends, and outliers and compare results against rules of
thumb and standard factors derived from historical data;
Interview data sources and document all pertinent information, including an assessment of
data reliability and accuracy;
Store data for future estimates.
Develop the cost model, estimating each WBS element, using the best methodology from
the data collected, and including all estimating assumptions;
Express costs in constant year dollars;
Time-phase the results by spreading costs in the years they are expected to occur, based
on the program schedule;
Sum the WBS elements to develop the overall point estimate;
Validate the estimate by looking for errors like double counting and omitted costs;
Compare estimate against the independent cost estimate and examine where and why
there are differences;
Perform cross-checks on cost drivers to see if results are similar;
Update the model as more data become available or as changes occur and compare
results against previous estimates.

135 Adapted from GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide, 2009
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

158

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The eighth step in the estimating process involves a sensitivity analysis. The sensitivity analysis is
designed to reveal how the cost estimate is affected by a change in a single assumption. The cost
estimator must examine the effect of changing one assumption or cost driver at a time while holding
all other variables constant. By doing so, it is easier to understand which variable most affects the cost
estimate. In some cases, a sensitivity analysis can be conducted to examine the effect of multiple
assumptions changing in relation to a specific scenario.
Regardless of whether the analysis is performed on only one cost driver or several within a single
scenario, the difference between sensitivity analysis and risk or uncertainty analysis is that sensitivity
analysis tries to isolate the effects of changing one variable at a time, while risk or uncertainty analysis
examines the effects of many variables changing all at once.
The sensitivity analysis can be useful for identifying areas where more design research could result in
less production cost or where increased performance could be implemented without substantially
increasing cost.136 For Hydrail, sensitivity analysis was used to narrow focus on the variables that had
the largest impact on the cost of the Hydrail program; these variables were subsequently reviewed in
further detail to refine the estimate of the cost input.
The final step in the estimating process is the risk and uncertainty analysis. Because cost estimates are
a prediction of future program costs, uncertainty is always associated with them. For example, data
from the past may not always be relevant in the future, because new manufacturing processes may
change a learning curve slope or new composite materials may change the relationship between
weight and cost. Regulatory conditions can also impact costs. Moreover, a cost estimate is usually
composed of many lower-level WBS elements, each of which comes with its own source of error.
Once these elements are added together, the resulting cost estimate can contain a great deal of
uncertainty.137 This step of the estimating process involves evaluating the risk and uncertainty
associated with a project and incorporating the potential cost of this risk and uncertainty into the total
cost estimate.
Risk and uncertainty reflect the fact that, because a cost estimate is a forecast, there is always a chance
that the actual cost will differ from the estimate. Lack of knowledge about the future is only one
possible reason for the difference. Another equally important reason is the error resulting from
historical data inconsistencies, assumptions, cost estimating equations, and factors typically used to
develop an estimate.138
In the early phases of any program, knowledge about how well technology will perform, whether the
estimates are unbiased, and how external events may affect the program is imperfect. To enable good
decision making, the program estimate must reflect the degree of uncertainty.139
Estimates are more uncertain at the beginning of a project because less is known about the detailed
requirements and the opportunity for change is great. As the project progresses, requirements
become better defined and risk better understood. As this happens, costs become more certain. In
many cases, costs also increase as project development progresses due to a better understanding of
additional requirements translating into previously unforeseen costs. This progression is illustrated in
Figure 4-42.

136 US GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide, 2009, pg. 147-148
137 ibid., pg. 153
138 ibid.
139 ibid., pg. 154
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

159

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-42 CHANGES IN COST ESTIMATE UNCERTAINTY ACROSS THE PROJECT DEVELOPMENT
LIFECYCLE140

It is typical to use four classes to represent the level of design, and associated uncertainty, at different
project stages. These classes are defined as follows:


Class A (Detailed Design - 100 percent design) estimates are pre-tender estimates, based on
completed construction drawings and detailed specifications contained in tender documents. The
expected precision of the estimate ranges from -5 percent to +10 percent of the actual contract
price.



Class B (Design Development - 67 percent design) estimates are design estimates based on an
advanced project design. They are based on design drawings, project specifications and include
detail on the design of electrical, mechanical and IT systems, as well as site requirements. The
expected precision of the estimate ranges from -10 percent to +15 percent of the actual contract
price.



Class C (Schematic Design - 33 percent design) is a planning level estimate usually based on a
Schematic Design and presented in Elemental Format (a budget setting format/technique which
considers the major elements of a project and provides an order of cost estimate based on an
Elemental Cost Analysis of a building project). These estimates establish a preliminary budget
estimate and a baseline against which project costs will be assessed at future project development
milestones. The expected precision of the estimate ranges from -15 percent to +20 percent of the
actual contract price.



Class D (Conceptual Design) estimates are conceptual estimates based on the project scope (the
work that needs to be accomplished to deliver the project) and functional requirements (the
output specifications/deliverables of a project), and are usually presented in unit cost analysis
format (applying a monetary rate to an element, subelement or component per unit of
measurement). The expected precision of the estimate ranges from -20 percent to +30 percent of
the actual contract price.141

140 US Government Accountability Office Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide, 2009
141 PPP Canada Schematic Design Estimate Guide, April 2014.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

160

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The current simulation model could be considered a Class D estimate, with an expected accuracy that
ranges from -20 percent to +30 percent of the actual costs. It is expected that the accuracy of the
estimate would improve should the feasibility study for Hydrail lead to a decision to move the project
to the next stage of development. The technology development process that is proceeding in parallel
to this study will further improve the accuracy and reduce the uncertainty of estimate. Estimating
accuracy improves significantly and the uncertainty in cost estimation reduces to a few percentage
points of the actual costs by the time the detail design is complete and the project is ready for
procurement and implementation.
It is important to continually update cost estimates so that decision makers have has the best
information available for making informed decisions. These processes are illustrated in what is
commonly called the Cone of Uncertainty shown on Figure 4-43.
FIGURE 4-43 CONE OF UNCERTAINTY

Development of Contingencies
Contingencies for infrastructure projects represent a mark-up applied to the base construction cost to
account for uncertainties in quantities, and unit costs. Contingencies are also included to capture risk
events during construction.142
At various stages of the estimating process it is possible to represent the uncertainty implications of
various cost estimates using a cumulative probability distribution curve or an S-curve as illustrated in
Figure 4-44.

142 Cost Estimating Manual for WSDOT Projects, March 2008.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

161

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-44 SAMPLE CUMULATIVE DISTRIBUTION CURVE FOR A PROJECT ESTIMATE (FROM THE US
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE COST ESTIMATING AND ASSESSMENT GUIDE, 2009)

The contingency then is the difference between the estimated cost and the budget to achieve a
certain confidence interval. This concept is illustrated in the following example:
The cumulative probability distribution curve provided in Figure 4-44 considers a hypothetical project
with an estimated cost of $825,000. The uncertainty analysis has revealed that this estimate represents
the 40th percentile meaning that there is a 60 percent chance that costs will be greater than the
estimate. Based on this analysis, a decision could be made to increase the project budget to achieve
greater certainty that the project cost will fall within the budgeted amount. For example, if the budget
for this project was increased from $825,000 to $1,096,000 then there would be a 70 percent
probability that project costs would fall within the budgeted amount. The $271,000 difference
between the estimated cost and the budgeted $1,096,000 represents the construction contingency in
this example.143
The level of confidence used to develop the contingency reflects organizational decisions on the level
of risk that is acceptable.

143 US GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide, 2009, pg. 157
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

162

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Limitations
Given the relatively short time frame for the Hydrail analysis, there are some elements of the cost
estimate that have not been completed to the level of detail that could be completed with further
study. These elements of the cost estimate that have not been addressed in the Hydrail simulation
model are outlined as follows:
1. Work Breakdown Structure (WBS): A WBS defines in detail the components necessary to
accomplish a program’s objectives. A WBS can be thought of as an illustration of which tasks will
be accomplished and which components will be delivered to satisfy a program’s requirements.
The WBS diagrams the effort in small, discrete pieces, or elements, to show how each one relates
to the others and to the program as a whole.
The number of levels for a WBS varies from program to program and depends on a program’s
complexity and risk. WBSs need to be expanded to a level of detail sufficient for planning and
successfully managing the full scope of work. However, each WBS should, at the very least, include
three levels:


The first level represents the program as a whole so contains only one element—the program’s
name.



The second level contains the major program segments.



Level three contains the lower-level components or subsystems for each segment.

A sample WBS for a process plant construction144 is shown in Table 4-33 for illustration.
TABLE 4-33 LIST OF SAMPLE WBS ELEMENTS
Level 2 Element
1.1 Plant system design

Level 3 Element
1.1.1 Business requirements
1.1.2 Process models

1.2 Construction

1.2.1 Site development
1.2.2 Civil structure
1.2.3 Thermal systems
1.2.4 Flow systems
1.2.5 Storage systems
1.2.6 Electrical systems
1.2.7 Mechanical systems
1.2.8 Instrument and control systems
1.2.9 Environmental systems
1.2.10 Temporary structure
1.2.11 Auxiliary systems
1.2.12 Safety systems

144 Source: Project Management Institute, Practice Standards for Work Breakdown Structures, project Management Institute, Inc. (2006).
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

163

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-33 LIST OF SAMPLE WBS ELEMENTS
Level 2 Element
1.3 Legal and regulatory

Level 3 Element
1.3.1 Licensing (nongovernment)/permitting (government)
1.3.2 Environmental impact
1.3.3 Labor agreements
1.3.4 Land acquisition

1.4 Testing

1.4.1 System test
1.4.2 Acceptance test

1.5 Start-up
1.6 Project management

Although a detailed WBS has not been developed for this study, different elements of the Hydrail
System have been discussed, and individual components have been identified for costing. The
WBS example does, however, provide some insight into additional costs not currently covered by
the Hydrail simulation, such as legal and regulatory expenses, testing, startup, and project
management expenses. These costs are known elements of a construction project, and although
they may not be accurately modelled in the feasibility study stage, they should be recognized in
the model, and carefully considered when making a decision based on the findings of the analysis.
These cost elements should not be captured under contingencies. By definition, contingency is an
allowance for unknown factors that may result in higher project costs, so it should not include cost
elements that are known but are absent in the cost estimate.
2. Risk analysis: The methodology for developing construction contingencies discussed involves the
use of probabilistic analysis of risk and uncertainty (that is, the contingency represents a markup
applied to the base construction cost to account for uncertainties in quantities and unit costs, and
is defined as the difference between the base cost estimate and the budget to achieve a certain
confidence interval). The confidence interval also depends on decision-makers’ risk appetites. At
this stage in the modelling exercise, contingency amounts have been based on the IBC and on the
technical expertise of the modelling team. At later stages of the exercise, a quantitative risk
assessment will result in a more refined contingency that can be carried into construction and
operations phases of the program.

4.4.3

Comparative Cost/Benefit Assessment of the Simulation
Scenarios

4.4.3.1 Hydrail Analysis
For purposes of this study, the first stage of the financial analysis involved comparing the anticipated
costs associated with Hydrail to those for overhead electrification, using the IBC model. Costs that are
common to both technologies (for example, track and station improvements) were held constant. Key
assumptions (for example, discount rate) were also held constant where reasonable, and adjusted
where necessary. As an example, assumptions regarding service patterns—the key driver behind
revenues and benefits of RER—were assumed to be equal under both technologies. As such, this part
of the study is predicated on an assumption that a Hydrail System would deliver the same level of
service as overhead electrification, as is discussed in Section 4.2.2. Inputs that would change (for
example, a new cost associated with the production of hydrogen and removal of capital costs
associated with overhead electrification) were the focus of the analysis. This allows for a like-for-like
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

164

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

analysis of Hydrail relative to Scenario 5 electrification, and mimics going back in time and adding
Hydrail as an additional scenario for RER in the 2014 analysis. However, as will be shown in this
section, a true like-for-like analysis requires updating certain IBC assumptions to reflect those used for
Hydrail.
As service levels are assumed to be the same, net benefits of the program as captured in the IBC
model do not change under a Hydrail scenario for RER. For purposes of the BCR, benefits are driven
by ridership of the RER system and because ridership is assumed to be the same for Hydrail the
benefits remain constant. There are numerous potential benefits and risks associated with both
overhead electrification and Hydrail that are not captured in the first stage of the IBC analysis. Some
are, however, discussed later in this section and in Section 4.7 where the broader social, economic
and environmental benefits are discussed. Later in this section, the financial analysis will further
examine the impact of Hydrail on capital and operating costs over the lifespan of the RER program,
including sensitivity analysis and potential fiscal impacts to the province.
It should be noted that within the cost items that were considered common to both technologies
there are certain elements that are likely to change between the Hydrail and overhead electric
systems. One example is the cost of property purchases currently considered in the IBC. Part of this
line item represents the cost to purchase land to develop substations that would be required for an
overhead contact system. Such costs would not, however, be required for Hydrail. Conversely,
additional land may be required to service Hydrail vehicles (for example, to replace hydrogen tanks at
specified service intervals) and may have an impact on land requirements within maintenance yards.
However, because the breakdown of cost items like this are not fully understood they have been
carried forward in the Hydrail simulation. Should the feasibility study lead to a decision to continue to
examine Hydrail, more detailed analysis of these costs would be required to provide a full picture of
the cost of each system.
The outputs from the Hydrail System simulation described previously were used to develop a
schedule of Hydrail costs for incorporation into the IBC model. The key cost drivers for the Hydrail
simulation were reviewed and highest and lowest values for these variables were developed. The
ranges for these variables are presented in Table 4-34.
TABLE 4-34 KEY COST DRIVERS FOR HYDRAIL
Highest Value

Lowest Value

Unit

Cost of electricity

76

46

$/MWh

Price of Electrolyzer

823

655

$/kW

Price of Storage

266

141

$/kg

Price of Refuelling

1,396

1,257

$/kg

Price of Dispensing

1.09

0.87

million $/unit

Price of Fuel Cell

1,000

450

$/kW

Lifetime of Electrolyzer

40,000

50,000

hours

Lifetime of Fuel Cell

25,000

40,000

hours

These highest and lowest case values were used to develop a high-cost scenario (where all the
variables were set at worst case levels) and a low-cost scenario (where all the variables were set at best
case levels) for Hydrail. These labels are not intended to apply any judgment of one technology over
another. The values were then used to develop new costs for electrification-related capital cost items,
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

165

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

electrification-related operating cost items, and fleets costs. All other costs described above (for
example, station expansions, signalling) are held constant. All real costs used in the analysis are in
2014 dollars.
The high end and low end for electricity price is estimated using IESO data and an optimized
hydrogen production schedule developed by the technical team. For further details, please refer to
Section 4.3.

4.4.3.2 Application of Cost Factors in the Hydrail Model
As discussed above, contingencies are a key part of the IBC model and, taken together, represent 90
percent of total capital costs. For Hydrail, the approach followed was to carry forward contingencies
and make adjustments based on several factors. First, the cost factor for Environmental Assessment,
Engineering and Design was increased from 15 percent to 30 percent for Hydrail. The application of
HFC technology in the rail industry is still relatively untested (as discussed elsewhere in this report). As
such it is reasonable to assume that the percentage of capital costs applied for engineering and
design should be higher than what was used to model a traditional overhead electric system through
the IBC model. This contingency only applies to initial capital investment and falls to 0 percent as
Hydrail assets need to be replaced or refurbished, reflecting the fact that expertise and experience
will have grown to a point where such events are highly predictable in terms of costs and risks.
Construction contingencies in the IBC model account for uncertainty associated with the cost of the
development and construction of a complex electrified rail system. In the IBC model, the construction
cost contingency for overhead electrification was 50 percent of estimated capital costs. This
contingency has been applied to all civil infrastructure and electrification base costs within the IBC
model. For purposes of this financial analysis, construction cost contingencies used in the IBC model
have been carried forward for Hydrail without change. A 50 percent contingency is reasonable for
capital undertakings where an organization has little experience, in this case signalling, for
electrification, and for the development of hydrogen-powered vehicles. Furthermore, the risk
associated with deploying a new application of a technology at the scale that would be required for
Hydrail, including establishing an entirely new supply chain for the production, transportation and
dispensing of hydrogen, further justifies inclusion of this contingency. Additionally, the contingency is
meant to capture costs that are currently not well understood for both the overhead and electrification
costs – these costs include things like financing costs, operator profit, taxes, and permitting fees.
Finally, a productivity and resource cost factor is applied to the on-corridor infrastructure for overhead
electrification and to all hydrogen related infrastructure for the Hydrail System (in addition to oncorridor infrastructure required for both systems). This cost factor is intended to capture the additional
costs associated with the construction of the RER system in a shorter time frame and more complex
environment than what is typical for similar projects. The productivity and resource factor is applied to
on-corridor infrastructure base costs to account for construction under increased rail traffic conditions
and ongoing service expansions, and includes consideration of limited specialized resources in the
industry (particularly for electrification and hydrogen technologies). This factor has not been applied
to system-wide costs like enhanced train control and maintenance facilities. The productivity and cost
resource factor applied to the overhead electrical system in the IBC is 25 percent and it is understood
that much of this factor accounts for the complexity of installing the overhead infrastructure during live
rail operations meaning much of the work will have to take place overnight, for example. This same
constraint does not exist for Hydrail implementation as capital works would likely not significantly
impact operations on the rail corridor. A potential advantage of Hydrail is the ability to roll out fleet
incrementally and intermingled with existing rolling stock. It is difficult to predict with accuracy at this
stage of the project if there might be disruptions or complications associated with a mixed-fuel fleet,
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

166

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

or the impact construction of hydrogen production and fuelling stations might have on current
operations. As a result, the productivity and cost resource factor for Hydrail has been reduced from
25 percent to 10 percent.
Further refinement is necessary to the cost factors to account for the life cycle of electrification and
Hydrail capital assets. Hydrail will require CAPEX throughout the life of the RER program to replace,
either fully or partially, components of the system like the fuel cells and on-board storage tanks. This
contrasts with overhead electrification where a large upfront CAPEX is expected but, based on the long
life-span of these capital components, ongoing expenditures have been assumed within IBC to be
limited to routine maintenance as opposed to system-wide replacement. While there are ongoing
CAPEX as part of Hydrail, it is expected that there will be greater cost certainty and potential design and
production cost savings as the Hydrail program ages and the technology matures. As such, the cost
escalation factors that are applied to initial CAPEX in the overhead electrification case and the Hydrail
case are not applied to the on-going expenditures related to the replacement or refurbishment of
Hydrail specific capital components. Cost factors discussed in this section are summarized in Table 4-35.
TABLE 4-35 COST FACTORS APPLIED IN THE IBC
Cost Factors Applied in the IBC

Overhead Electrification

Hydrail

Environmental Assessment,
Engineering and Design

15 percent of base capital costs

30 percent of base capital costs

Infrastructure (Corridors)

Contingency – 50 percent of base capital
costs
Productivity and resource factor – 25 percent
of base capital costs

Contingency – 50 percent of base capital
costs
Productivity and resource factor – 10
percent of base capital costs

Infrastructure (System-wide
components)

Contingency – 50 percent of base capital
costs

Contingency – 50 percent of base capital
costs

4.4.4

Sensitivity Analysis

Following the development of the capital and operating costs for the Hydrail System, a sensitivity
analysis was performed to quantify the impact of each individual variable on the be BCR using the
following approach:


All cost variables were set at their high case values to establish a baseline for comparison (that is,
the high scenario).



Each variable was then individually changed to its lowest case while keeping all other variables
unchanged.



The NPV of the following outputs were recorded for each iteration:





Total CAPEX = total initial capital + total replacement cost



Total OPEX = total operating cost + total maintenance cost

The change in NPV was calculated and sorted from highest to lowest.

The sensitivity analysis shows that three variables result in largest variation in the NPV of the selected
outputs:


Cost of electricity



Lifetime of fuel cell



Price of fuel cell

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

167

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The sensitivity analysis shows that all other variables have a negligible effect (that is, below 2 percent)
on the output parameters. The outputs from the sensitivity analysis are presented in Table 4-36. This
analysis was used to guide the modelling team to the variables that require the most precision and
that warrant the most in-depth analysis through conversations with industry and research.
TABLE 4-36 OUTPUT OF THE SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
High

Low

percent Change

76

46

-

NPV of Total OPEX

2,356

1,623

-31 percent

Price of fuel cell ($/kW)

1,000

450

-

NPV of Total CAPEX

2,595

2,070

-20 percent

Lifetime of fuel cell (hours)

25,000

40,000

-

NPV of Total CAPEX

2,595

2,325

-10 percent

Cost of electricity ($/MWh)

4.4.5

Model Benchmarking

In addition to the financial analysis presented in this section, the hydrogen pricing model was
compared to publicly available case studies. This exercise provides a benchmark for the result of the
modelling exercise used in Hydrail feasibility study.
Several key technologies for producing hydrogen were studied by the H2A145 team with expertise in
design and advancement of these technologies within the United States Department of Energy
Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Program146. One case study covers future estimates for central hydrogen
production using PEM technology. The model inputs were modified to match requirements of the
Hydrail project (that is, total hydrogen production, price of electricity, unit cost of electrolyzer and
total capacity installed), as shown in Table 4-37.
TABLE 4-37 INPUT PARAMETERS FOR A CENTRAL HYDROGEN PRODUCTION FACILITY
Cost Component

Unit

DOE

CNL

tonnes /day

48.5

48

price of electricity

$/MWh

66

63

cost of electrolyzer

$/kW

508

508

lifetime of stack

years

10

15

electrolyzer capacity installed

MW

293

281

Hydrogen production

The results of the DOE model were then compared against the Hydrail simulation model. The results
of this analysis are shown in Table 4-38.

145 H2A, which stands for Hydrogen Analysis, was first initiated in February 2003 to better leverage the combined talents and capabilities of
analysts working on hydrogen systems, and to establish a consistent set of financial parameters and methodology for analyses
(https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/h2a_analysis.html)
146 Please refer to https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/h2a_prod_studies.html
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

168

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-38 RESULTS OF THE CENTRAL HYDROGEN PRODUCTION FACILITY MODELS
Cost Component

DOE

Hydrail Simulation

Total direct capital

$ 148,259,713

$ 147,957,111

Total indirect depreciable capital

$ 27,817,995

$-

$ 3,272,705

$-

Engineering and design

$-

$-

Project contingency

$-

$-

$ 24,545,290

$-

$ 176,077,708

$-

$ 305,320

$-

$ 176,383,028

$ 147,957,111

Capital Costs ($)

Site Preparation

Up-Front Permitting Costs
(legal and contractor fees)
Total depreciable cost
Total non-depreciable cost
Total capital cost

Operating Costs ($)
Fixed operating cost (maintenance)

$ 4,521,768

$ 2,351,710

Variable operating cost (cost of electricity)

$ 58,588,148

$ 58,199,567

Total operating cost

$ 63,109,916

$ 60,551,277

0.99

0.56

Variable operating cost

3.31

3.31

Fixed operating cost

0.26

0.13

Other costs

0.23

-

Initial Equity Depreciable Capital

0.00

-

Cash for Working Capital Reserve

0.02

-

Debt Interest

0.11

-

Taxes

-0.01

-

Principal Payment

0.10

-

Cost of production ($/kg)

5.02

4.01

Cost of hydrogen production ($/kg)
Depreciable cost of capital

The results of the two models are categorized as follows:


Capital costs: total capital cost estimated under the DOE model is approximately $30 million
(19 percent) higher than those estimated by the Hydrail simulation. This is because some up-front
costs (including permitting and legal costs), as well as site preparation costs, are not included in
the Hydrail simulation model. It is important to note, however, that the two models produce
comparable results for direct capital costs.



Operating costs: maintenance costs are estimated to be higher in the DOE model than in the
Hydrail simulation model by approximately $2.5 million per year. The DOE model yields a result
for operating costs that is very close to the Hydrail simulation model (4 percent variance).

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

169

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

